hmm
the emergence of myth is not something
sequestered to ancient history but
something very much ongoing in our time
um
if i go to amazon.com today
and i look for
important new research
on the philosophy of ancient buddhism
i will find again and again seemingly
respectable books
by a man named christian lintner
christian leonard is deceased
he either died in 2020
or 2021.
today
you can still search around the internet
and find the last traces of his
attachment to holocaust denial
and nazi ideology
but piece by piece
those are disappearing from the internet
today
you can still find the memorable website
jesus is buddha.com
where he announces his
theory
that the origin
of the new testament
the origin of the gospel of jesus is in
fact
siddhartha gautama the buddha that the
men who wrote the new testament were
actually transcribing from and adapting
ancient buddhist sources that's the
thesis of that
website that too now that he's deceased
will quite likely disappear i can
imagine that his children or
grandchildren will want to have
something more respectable to remember
their father or grandfather
on the internet and i can easily imagine
how the period of his being
disillusioned with neo-nazism and
disillusioned with holocaust denial
because he did live long enough that he
ceased to be a nazi and turned against
those people and became their their
critic how
a sort of myth of his being a good and
wonderful person could be constructed
out of those pieces and certainly um
the memory of the people live on this
earth who were willing to say to me face
to face
look
this guy can't really read ancient
tibetan
or look
this guy knows less sanskrit than you do
people who just said to me face to face
that this guy's language ability really
was not up to much uh those people will
also fade and what will remain
are books on the shelf that are
perceived first and foremost as having
been written by
a white
man
from europe now some of you in the
audience may say well what difference
does that make
how would you regard
a book written about buddhist philosophy
that was written by a tribal person in
south america
a member of an indigenous tribe
how would you
regard a book
written by someone who had a
royal title
from a small country in africa you had
never heard of
a black african of the local aristocracy
oh it matters and
in case you think it's only white
western people who are influenced by the
ethnicity and
social class of the authors of these
books their contributions to the history
of buddhist philosophy take a moment to
ask yourself
how different it must seem in the eyes
of a japanese person
in the eyes of a sri lankan person a
thai person the people who themselves
are shall we say ancestrally connected
to buddhism
people who have grandparents and
great-grandparents who one way or
another are involved in the religious
tradition
to them
the question of the ethnicity social
class background and formal education
the author may matter a great deal more
and they may find it very difficult to
be cynical about it christian lintner
no matter how easily or
because no matter how easily he may
discredit be discredited in my eyes
all right
but it wasn't that easy to discredit him
in my eyes either right like i had to
look around i had to figure out to what
extent this guy was a crackpot right if
you just i i first encountered that
guy's name by taking a book off a
library shelf and i thought this is a
great scholar he has doctor and phd next
to his name and this is this nicely
bound book and here he is telling me
buddhist philosophy and it's stating
that he's a great scholar who works in
these ancient languages and you know i i
don't think any book of his had his
photograph so i i guess it's just on the
basis of his name and title that i
presumed he was a white european raised
in this raising this kind of elite
tradition right it's a lot you don't
know when you encounter that book on the
shelf but anyway i was able to
google around and again i've already
alluded to i spoke to some people uh
face to face directly about who this guy
was and where a scholarship come came
from i was able to pierce the veil of
respectability uh on a scholarship well
even if you were just born and raised in
japan you might not see it that way
and japan is the home of what's called
pera history so you know there's there's
history and there's pseudo history
there's this other category of
imaginative para history
and there are actually a lot of people
in japan who believe that jesus
physically traveled to japan now i
i learned this much japanese uh earlier
today i was joking with melissa about
how much or how little value i get from
my study of japanese
it was a japanese title and i was able
to read it out in convincing sounding uh
you know japanese was able to pronounce
it properly
you know what i always wonder about
those people is how would they respond
to someone just sitting down with them
and saying
really
okay you how do you believe jesus
actually came here you think he he came
on a cloud you keep you like he flew
through the air like superman really
really you know like you know and like
you know these people they always
believe there's some physical trace of
him like a footprint or something you
know like you really think that's just
really
really just not even not even exercising
any kind of you know skepticism but just
you know come on really you know like is
this is this something you think will
benefit your
grandchildren to hear as a kind of
parable is it something you think has
symbolic value or do you
really believe this well the japanese
culturally they live with a somewhat
flexible attitude toward the truth they
have a somewhat pliant set of tendencies
when reading history they like a great
deal now most westerners only get
excited about this when it's world war
ii when it's the nazis when it's uh you
know mass murderer massacres and so on
but their their whole history um ancient
modern buddhist and secular they they
tend to have a much more forgiving
attitude it's very easy for me to
imagine a japanese person the same age
as myself
um finding that christian lintner
supported this theory that
jesus is buddha.com
[Laughter]
and having a kind of appreciative
detached attitude okay oh yeah so we
support that and indeed anyone my age in
japan would have heard many japanese
people uh making similarly outlandish
claims uh japanese christians tend to
like to validate their religion with
very strange comparative reference to
buddhism and japanese buddhists like to
make strange compared presence to
christianity what if you were born and
raised in tibet you know the extent to
which people are
credulous
whether they are asian african south
american or they are themselves white
european the the extent of which people
are gullible
and extend a kind of unquestioned
credibility to someone just because they
are
a white man from europe um
this is a prejudice that haunts us still
now obviously we mostly talk about
racism
in terms of oppression and denigration
and dismissing people and not taking
their opinions seriously we have to talk
about the opposite once them all too
which is of taking people's opinions
too seriously
of giving them too much credibility of
not asking the right questions at all
now as i've just mentioned this
particular example christian lintner he
died i believe in 2020 another website
said he died in 2021 but at any rate
quite quite recently
um he's left this mortal coil
perhaps perhaps to be reincarnated in a
new and better form perhaps
[Laughter]
or perhaps we could say
if there is a hell below
[Laughter]
who could possibly be more deserving of
reincarnation in hell than christian
litter
um
you know this christian lindner
phenomenon
if you think okay
if you are astonished to see
that
such a crackpot could rise to the
highest levels of
academic esteem respectability power and
influence
in the 21st century
what kind of person do you think
occupied that same position in the
20th century in the 19th century and yes
yes y'all in the 18th century this is a
pattern that goes back a long way
and it's the scope of its influence is
tremendously deep
now
in terms of title this video i do
perceive my own lifetime as having been
one of the decline of buddhist
scholarship
so let's just pause for a moment to talk
about the decline from what to what
the nature of this decline is one that
many of you in the audience will relate
to
immediately
uh because you also have lived through
the rise of information technology and
simply the demise of
human cooperation
there was a time when
writing a book
and
type setting a book and publishing a
book involved the cooperation of a whole
army of people
now what kind of book
let's say you wanted to publish a
dictionary
whether a dictionary just of english or
a dictionary of a foreign language
explained in english
in the 18th century think about how many
people would have participated in that
process you know we talk about
collective authorship and authorship by
committee there was a time when really
truly working alone was virtually
unknown and you know the exceptions
proved the rule i think people did write
short poems although and things like
this but making a large authoritative
text used to be a process that involved
a great many people uh collaborating
now
research into buddhism
it seemed to go with seven league boots
in the 19th century it seemed to go so
quickly so many groundbreaking new
discoveries so much progress and that's
part of what inspired the crack pottery
of our times you know i'll come back in
just a moment
um
and it's not because people were more
brilliant
100 years ago or or 200 years ago i
think there are many ways we could hear
launch into a uh
you know critique of our system of
education and in what ways people may
have actually been better educated
centuries ago than they are now
but the fundamental difference is that
people work together in groups when you
talk about the so-called great white men
of european scholarship 100 years ago
200 years ago etc what really made them
different from scholars today is that
they worked in a group of 20 guys
and very often just one or two of those
guys would be white europeans they'd
work with local buddhist monks they'd
work with local buddhist lay people they
didn't okay depending on exactly what
we're talking about they either didn't
fly they went by ship they went by boat
or they walked over land in some cases
like just somewhat decoros some of those
literally walked to get from europe to
asia they went slowly they made friends
they stayed a long time some of them got
married so on and so forth now i'm going
to use an example actually from the end
of this you know sort of heroic period
where it seems like people make such
rapid progress in the language
um they accomplish these great things in
just a few years whereas today in the
21st century you ask a buddhist scholar
to translate just a few pages a very
short you know
ancient buddhist texts or sutra and
it's five years or ten years and they
sit there and hold their chin and you
know they're working their part-time job
as an instructor at the university and
it seems like they can't really get much
done and after the five years or ten
years have gone by it seems that they
haven't really made much of an
improvement over what some other scholar
did 150 years ago and what
why is it that people made such rapid
progress in the past i'll mention a
female scholar uh from the end of this
heroic period where one seems to be
going with seven league boots people
seem to be working so rapidly and making
these breakthroughs uh so on and so
forth
alexandra david nail
also pronounced alexandra david neal
[Music]
david dale
had a series of lovers
in asia
the one that stands out in my
mind was that she became the
girlfriend of the crown prince of bhutan
smog
talk about royalty from a small kingdom
you've never heard of some people
so she had some some love affairs where
she settled down
she had an adopted son
so she adopted uh tibetan i i think he
was a teenager i honestly forget how old
he was but he wasn't a he wasn't a small
small child when when she adopted him he
spoke the language fluently and then
obviously she became more fluent in
tibetan and he became fluent in
english and french
i guess primarily french in that case
she did speak english also
she stayed i believe for several years
uh in a buddhist monastery with one
particular buddhist monk whom she had a
great deal of
intellectual admiration for she was one
of those well-experienced buddhists who
felt that the vast majority of buddhist
monks were people of absolutely zero
intellectual substance but there was one
particular buddhist malcom she met and
got to know after she
had herself made progress in the
language and knowledge of the doctrine
and philosophy and what have you and she
lived with him and spent time with
himself and then what do you know
after she gets back to europe with this
deep
experience
she's able to very rapidly translate
large quantities of tibetan texts and
give you penetrating insights and
attacks some of them buddhist some of
them some of them what you might call
pagan you know but non-buddhist texts
that are part of the the tibetan
tradition
to mispronounce it horribly because i
never worked on tibetan myself uh the
epic of geshar so geshar ling i i'm
certain in tibetan it is not pronounced
geshar lang but uh that i i worked on
pali and
thai cambodia and lao
et cetera i worked on southeast asian
buddhism and now chinese is my language
scholarship so i never i never worked in
tibet and all but anyway she did some of
this um epic poetry so and so forth and
she did write about the the philosophy
of
buddhism uh too well how is that
possible why do you think she was able
to accomplish these great things and
people who are the products of our phd
programs today can't do anything like
that well it's
precisely because they are the products
of these phd programs and you could say
to any one of them
well you know
what if instead of hanging around at
cambridge or oxford or even let's say
new york university or something it
doesn't matter what university says
what if instead
you had physically walked from europe to
tibet
the one guy i know who walked by the way
is uh chisoma decoros
a hungarian scholar what if you had
walked there stayed there lived there
fallen in love maybe even gotten married
and raised a kid there something like
you passed many years but even if you
didn't get married and raise a kid had
some series of local lovers who you
practice the language with what if
you've done military service there for a
few years especially in india in the in
the british empire a lot of these guys
they lived out there for years as
employees of the raj as as employees of
the british army of occupation you know
again in the case of um alexandra
devinell you know she actually adopted a
son she lived in a monastery
what if you had really spent all these
years and during those years you
actually gathered a circle of
friends or colleagues around you whether
those be local buddhist monks or you
know farmers or
some eccentric intellectuals there who
would actually sit with you and help you
with these languages and help you with
these texts do you think you would have
learned more or less than you learned in
your phd program in a western university
even today even in 2021 and let's be
real today if you go to any of these
places when you get there people already
have the internet people already have
sega genesis
i'm dating
they already have playstation 4 or
whatever
they've already got they've already got
video games they've already got the
internet they've you know when you get
there they've got uh dvd movies and a
lot of them have grown up watching the
same tv shows you grew up with you know
like really really i mean when i was
living in southeast asia
everyone was watching the tv show
friends
is that the tv sitcom
starring david schwimmer etc and it
touched me recently i saw a news item
talking about the state of the internet
in cuba which is changing from year to
year if not month to month but when i
saw this news item
they were talking about these big hard
drives people were bringing over
hard drives the size of efficient tackle
box so they'd go to america they'd
download as much crap as they could
bring it over and then people in cuba
would plug in their laptops or phones or
whatever and get what they wanted then
the hard drive would go back again so
because of lack of internet access and
because of the presence of uh
cuban
government internet censorship anyway i
i've just lately heard just a couple
days ago i heard that it's loosened up
and now there are a few places in cuba
where people can access the internet
normally
i don't know could change month-to-month
year over here but any case um
so the interview asks well look
when you look at the data
what are the majority of people in cuba
downloading and the number one answer
was the tv sitcom friends that was what
[Laughter]
so there's something to the the post
communist experience that people in laos
people in
you know uh
you know you'll hear it all over the
world you know some of these american
sitcoms they're growing up with watching
us so you know this is no longer such an
exotic remote and distant place as it
was a hundred years ago or two years ago
technology has in these ways brought us
closer together and many of them their
uh their idea of buddhism
has been influenced by watching some of
the same movies you may have watched
there are certainly buddhist monks in
thailand who grew up watching
movies about buddhism made in hong kong
taiwan sometimes in communist china you
know movies like crouching tiger hidden
dragon kung fu movies things that you
know animate buddhist philosophy
literally or or figure like they're
people who've grown up with modern
influences and modern expectations so
you know the encounter is is somewhat
different but there can be no doubt that
compared to this sort of heroic earlier
era of scholarship we're now talking
about a decline it seemed like people at
that time were making these
groundbreaking discoveries
amazing new translations
and today i i've actually confirmed this
sometimes by emailing or talking
face-to-face with the translators of
so-called new translations where i say
to them look i can read the ancient text
i can read pally
i probably could do this with sanskrit
even though sanskrit is not my area of
study but it's closer it's like look i
can see
that you did not translate this from
pali like i can tell you didn't work
from because this is what the pali says
this is what the english translation
from 150 years ago says and then this is
what your english says so obviously you
took the english and you
modernized it or adapted it and yeah by
the way in case you know in some cases
it's not english to english sometimes
it's 120 years ago there was a german
translation and you didn't you
translated german to english somewhere i
can tell you looked at the english and
the french like there was maybe there
was a french translation
a hundred years ago and then you came up
with this because it's not really
original work
um i'm remembering just one case now
where a guy emailed me back admitting it
he said yeah he didn't he didn't
actually work from the palate i think
there were some other cases were talking
to people face to face they were willing
to kind of
take on the chin and say all these
people have phds all of them live in a
type of comfort that 100 years ago was
either unimaginable or only kings and
queens ever came i'm sorry i appreciate
this myself just the
the my ability to wash my hands and use
a toilet and a shower i do not take
these things for granted i know in terms
of the number of hours the day people
have to put into cooking and cleaning
and worrying about pooing in a bucket
and showering hopefully not using the
same bucket you know i know what it's
like to shower the bucket using cold
water and all this stuff having heated
water and electric lights and of course
the almighty uh keyboard and computer
you know it's it's made scholarship so
much easier and
in so many ways
um
shout out to william mcgeehan who's
saying yes in cuba they enjoy all the
old american tv shows so
i guess i guess for them it's kind of a
nostalgia for a past they didn't
experience themselves
uh you know generally kind of surrogate
nostalgia displace nostalgia
um maybe a yearning for a type of
normalcy that never existed in their own
country and perhaps never will
how little do they realize that within
the united states of america incredibly
few people have access to the type of
normalcy featured in those same sitcoms
it gives us a false sense of normalcy
too but we're able to be a bit more uh
i don't know
at least a bit more yeah a bit more
ironical about it a bit more detached
about it a bit more cynical about it
yeah
um
[Music]
[Laughter]
uh
what happened with buddhism in
particular was that
the thrilling fast-paced nature of those
breakthroughs when they were happening
in scholarship
um
inspired or reinforced belief in what
could be called the q hypothesis
on a massive scale so i'll explain what
i mean by the q hypothesis for those who
don't know i'll just say
the disadvantage
of the type of collegial cooperation
that i was praising before
is that many east asian prejudices
crept into the work of
you know white western european scholars
it informed their work in ways that they
themselves were often well not critical
of and sometimes genuinely unaware of
so to give an example
many many many europeans who went to
work in the british empire in whatever
capacity but many of them were literally
soldiers they were soldiers living in a
barracks while they were doing uh
research on buddhism hinduism china's
ancient india or just archaeology
generally someone just went and started
excavating whatever there was to be
excavated but you know guys who got
interested in the history and philology
and what have you research and
archaeology
some of them were literally soldiers
others were bureaucrats like the
infamous tw rhys davids himself and a
kind of middle management position
let's say in the in the british empire
which was no great advantage over being
a soldier maybe the soldiers had more
free time and were thus more able to go
and do these things that they had they
had a scholarly bone in there in their
bodies
you know if a soldier were to seek out
the company of
a respectable brahman
and this would presumably be either a
brahmana who could speak english
or brahman who could work through a
cousin a son or a grandson who could
translate
from the modern language of the area
into into english
um
the
myth that would be impressed upon
this european outsider again and again
was that sanskrit was the most important
language sanskrit was the language of
the gods all these other languages that
people talk about whether it be tibetan
pali what have you they've come along
later they're much less important in
order to understand anything about india
or buddhism or hinduism sanskrit
sanskrit it's cancer it's this kind of
ideology that this one language is the
one true language of india that that
ought to be study
now it's rare to see these european
scholars at the earlier period really
showing their cards and i've written at
least one essay where i was going
through that literature and i was
finding smoking gun evidence where they
admit it that they've taken on this this
attitude which is completely ahistorical
it's completely false
really it would be just as ridiculous as
a catholic insisting to you if you want
to know about ancient judaism
latin latin is the language you guys
know latin
well
you know
if you wanted over the history of italy
latin is the language to know but if you
want to know the history of greece if
you wanted the history of the jewish
bible you know there there are really
different languages and different
histories and different churches it's uh
it's pretty it's pretty obvious in
various ways um
but i have managed to piece together
some smoking gun evidence of what
doubtless was mostly an oral tradition
rather than being flagrantly written in
the open that what these guys got into
their heads was
the assumption that
prior to
the written tradition of teravata
buddhism which is called the pali canon
prior to the tibetan tradition which is
called the tibetan cannon prior to the
chinese tradition which can you guess
it's called the chinese
prior to all these traditions there had
been one ur text there had been one
original pure perfect text
that had been written in sanskrit
okay
if you don't even dabble in the field
you won't get how ridiculous that is but
that is just as ridiculous as a catholic
telling you that the original words of
jesus christ were in latin no obviously
latin is a later
embellishment upon the words of jesus
christ it could could not possibly be
that the historical jesus if you believe
there ever was one
actually spoke latin
anyway
he would have been more likely to speak
greek actually
if he had lived in that part of the
world that time greek as the lingua
franca of the eastern mediterranean but
in any case you know no that is really
just ridiculous there is no chance if
you just look at a map and see where the
historical buddha was supposed to have
lived and when and all the textual
evidence it cannot possibly be that the
original uh
teaching of the buddha is written in
sanskrit but they got into their heads
that parallel to the q hypothesis in the
interpretation
of the bible they would assert the q
hypothesis in the teaching of the buddha
so i'll say a little bit about the
psychology of this
but i also have to tell you what the q
hypothesis is now if you have read the
new testament even once
you will have noticed that the most
famous and influential part of the new
testament is called the gospels
and you get multiple versions
of the same events
in the gospels and they do not differ
from one another accidentally
it's not that they have errors that have
crept in like scribal errors it's not a
case of two different witnesses to one
event describing it differently a great
example of which would be uh
jfk
hey guys i do see your comments coming
in i will uh i'll
reply anyone who asks questions on a
high enough level i'm happy to reply to
um
christians tried to convince themselves
that the differences between the gospels
could be accounted for by imagining or
positing an earlier perfect manuscript
it doesn't exist and has never existed
which is referred to as the q manuscript
q is just abbreviating a german word for
source we have fella and irkfella from
from german you know the where where
something comes from so the q manuscript
the q hypothesis now
today still today uh you can interview
witnesses
to the assassination of jfk
a lot of them are dying of old age now
but you can also just on youtube look at
video clips and audio clips
and some of them differ from one another
literally because of their perspective
if someone who is standing on the
left-hand side of the car facing this
way and they describe if someone's
standing on the right-hand side of the
car i just heard uh uh the perspective
of a guy who's standing in front of the
car the car was driving towards him
would you have to shut here's a somewhat
different perspective somewhat different
memory up and recollection of whatever
and there are some witnesses who are
intentionally lying they know that
they're lying they know that they're
misleading you but nevertheless there
you have differences you know you can
try to reconcile or study and i think
here too it's meaningful to say there is
no q hypothesis right there isn't one
true story these have all derived from
well you know christians clung to this
notion of the q hypothesis for a very
long time precisely because they didn't
want to believe that the authors of the
gospels were intentionally lying or that
they were intentionally revising one
another's stories they were reading an
earlier version of the story and saying
oh no no i don't want it to happen that
way i'm going to write it this way for
this reason that they were intentionally
trying to write a better fable
they wanted to believe
that these were competing imperfect
recollections of real historical events
none of the evidence supports that
all of the evidence supports the notion
that the new testament was written
i should say specifically the gospels
within the new testament were written as
parables as works of fiction meant to
express a moral point like a like a
fable
now i'll talk about what the buddhist
canon is like as very few people will
ever read or study it
um
in just a moment it is very very
different from the from the gospels it's
a very strange comparison to make um
[Music]
you know just so that it doesn't slip my
mind it'll just give you a really brief
anecdote i once got an email from a
sincere buddhist but this is a white
western person who didn't know any of
these languages
and she wrote to me after speaking to
several other buddhas and they could
tell there was something wrong with the
english in the translation of a very
short sutra so sutra in pali is suta
just means a short text i guess they can
be long but
anyway it's a it's a unit of buddhist
texts you know in effect
and you know it's true if you just
looked at the english you could tell
there was some jiggery pokery going on
in this translation
and the pali was incredibly blunt and
straightforward
and i said back wow you know this is
fascinating you've found an example of a
of a sutra that is warning you
that meditation causes madness that it
drives people insane that people go
mad
and um
you know i said more than this
you know a little bit more to the email
conversation but in the reply this
person uh
wrote back and said oh well
you know could it be that they're saying
meditating excessively causes madness or
if you do it the wrong way a cosmic and
i went through that part of it word four
was like no no this is it it was like
let's say it was just three words three
words or fours i don't know this is
really warning you that meditating leads
to madness and i said no i mean this is
interesting because it shows the
diversity of the authors who wrote the
pali canon who wrote the most ancient
most historically important version of
the buddhist bible if you like these
ancient buddhist
texts
she was very surprised at this she says
well what do you mean i say oh well you
didn't think it was all written by one
person did you
oh openly overtly if you just read these
texts it's written by many different
people and they have different opinions
about things now they have a lot in
common all of them were buddhist monks
you know they were all people who were
committed enough to this religion that's
that's very different from many other
types of religious literature historical
literature philosophical literature you
know for example you might have a
compendium of philosophy and some of the
people writing in it are scientists and
some are not and the different
scientists have different
totally different areas of expertise
like some come out of physics some goes
at a chemistry or something you know
they grew up in different parts of the
world well the penalty cannon
all the guys writing it have a lot in
common you know because they all they
were all buddhist monks at around the
same time but oh no they really have
very different opinions about exactly
the kind of stuff that this
compendium is of philosophy is about
they don't view meditation the same way
for example you know you didn't you
didn't realize this anyways there was a
little bit more of that that
conversation that i'm not relating i'm
just kind of truncating it
point is here
the anxiety christians had
i can sympathize with
because they have
a text an ancient sacred text that does
not in any way based on its own evidence
seem to be an historical document of an
actual person who was once alive
and that's what they desperately yearn
for it to be they want the gospels to
have the quality and characteristics
of a record of an actual person who
lived and of actual historical events
and even if you have no source external
to the bible if you just study the old
testament and the new testament
including by the way the connections
between the new testament the old
testament where it's quoting or alluding
to things the way it's put together
it is inescapable
the conclusion is inescapable that the
gospels were written as fiction and they
were intent to intend to have this kind
of allegorical fable
quality uh like many legends uh written
in greek at that time and had some
resemblance to things found within the
hebrew canon also you know
um
but that
nobody writing this nobody was alive at
that time engaged in the construction of
the text and
the selection of sources from the old
testament and so on and so forth but the
people who actually just they themselves
didn't think
they were quoting an historically real
figure when they were telling this story
the fable of uh of jesus christ
now the pali canon
the most ancient buddhist scriptures
it's the exact opposite
just reading the text just looking at it
the internal evidence including these
kinds of uh this kind of cacophony the
kind of the dissonant voices within it
um
buddhist monks who often disagree with
one another it's completely obvious that
the text really is an attempt to
describe historically real people
and
they don't all agree with one another so
on and so forth and the actual
historical events
um are kind of all dismally normal none
of them are hard to believe in none of
them are miraculous you know what i mean
and anyway then
it lends itself so easily to an
historically realistic interpretation
including even the fabulous elements
because you have within the pali canon
the debate about whether or not they
should tell
fabulous magical stories whether they
should make up these kinds of stories
about the buddha what the point is of
them you get that debated right so you
haven't you have a text
that is
debating
how it should be written in front of you
the reader it's it's discussing its own
historical origins with you i could say
sort of transparently enough
um
now you know
just just to regress very briefly
the people who wrote the pathway cannon
did they believe in ghosts
some of them did
and some of them didn't
that's what makes it interesting
so some
sutas or sutras in terms of the universe
texts some of them are written by people
who ostensibly and probably actually
they were completely true believers in
supernatural miracles ghosts
demons this kind of thing and there are
some texts in that collection that are
written by people who are obviously
ironical skeptics
people who think that these are stories
made up to entertain children but that
really things like ghosts and demons and
yetis and magic do not exist in this
world and that supernatural miracles
even those attributed to the buddha no
such thing exists in this world so you
can see
all of this in this uh this kind of
jumbled
internally incoherent
set of texts
all right
so
the reason for christians
asserting the q hypothesis is completely
clear and it's also completely
fallacious and completely false it's
completely impossible to support or
substantiate but understand why they're
doing it i understand what they're
trying to gain from it
what what europeans brought into the mix
as never before with
buddhism
was really a kind of
hindu
[Music]
reappropriation of buddhism i think
precisely because so many of those
europeans relied on hindus to teach them
sanskrit and they absorbed this notion
that sanskrit was the central most
ancient most important most dominant
language now secondarily
what these europeans believed in was
their own genius
their own potential to change the world
and to transform buddhism for the better
babe could you pass me the waterfront
i'll look at the uh i'll look at the
comments from saying here
quote from william again
quote believe it or not i've had people
tell me that kenny rogers is a great
singer
recent arrivals to the united states
somebody with the memorable name of
nobody wins asks hi sir any tips to
start on my own path to become an
intellectual
well without digressing into a one-hour
monologue on the subject you know i had
someone writing to me recently who
seemed to me frankly to be really lost
in his own [ __ ] um
you know and in some ways that's kind of
inspiring someone who is working hard to
create his own philosophy and think
about life philosophically and seriously
but in some ways that's depressing
because it's all [ __ ] and um
i said to him look you know
it's not that i'd really recommend any
one thing in particular for you but i
feel like if you were to take on a
research project
on something you're totally detached
from where you're not
you're not invested morally or
emotionally in one side or the other
being right that you can learn a great
deal about human nature and learn to
challenge some of your own [ __ ]
precipitations so the the example i gave
him what i recommended was that he
researched
the rise and fall of the revolution in
haiti so you have the french revolution
the haitian revolution and then you have
in a sense the french counter-revolution
the french trying to suppress and
reverse the revolution haiti now maybe
this isn't the best
example but this guy is a white european
i think he's never thought about the
history of haiti before not saying this
to insult him he has probably never
given much thought to the status of
black people
in north america south america central
america you know it's probably not
something he
has ever really thought about for five
minutes
well you know studying the history of
haiti doesn't make you an intellectual
studying the history of the french
revolution doesn't make you an
intellectual but i do think that if
you're if you are as you as you're
saying here if you're just starting on
the path to becoming intellectual
reading and researching things that that
are really remote from you that way uh
is important and i'll give you a simple
example i mean it is kind of relevant to
what we're we're talking about here but
whenever i've spoken to people who
really were racist
on the internet including vegans who
don't think they're racist but who were
talking about the relationship between
dna and iq and these things that the the
new uh right-wing racists of our time
you know propound
belief in genetic inequality of
intelligence this kind of thing
you know it's okay well look you know
you're really wrapped up in talking
about that
in like downtown chicago you're talking
about black people versus white people
in chicago
or uh
the state of georgia you know this this
kind of thing within the united states
of america okay well i challenge you if
you really believe in this
framework have you looked at education
and outcomes
in vietnam
different ethnic groups within vietnam
and right away they're already shocked
they never thought about what there's
more than one ethnic group within
vietnam yeah didn't you know that you
know uh just today i was watching jj
mccullough's video about taiwan well you
have several totally different ethnic
groups within taiwan even you know there
are a lot of opportunities for this like
if this is actually something sincere if
you're not racist why don't you study
this somewhere where you're totally
detached you have no engagement with one
side where you're really challenging
yourself and you're really learning
something new
um so i do think you discover some of
the rudiments of what it means to be
intellectual if you're if you're just at
the beginnings by really challenging
yourself that way now look uh this is
very very different from advice i've
given to melissa um in some ways similar
you know one so i made a very passionate
video on this channel that is called why
i am forcing you to read aristotle
so i did force mysterios
and you know i did come up with a list
of books from ancient greece in rome
that are important and i can show that
out here and say go watch that video go
watch all the videos i did about
aristotle athens greece et cetera i
think that's worth reading there are
books from ancient china i think are
worth reading this video is talking
about books from ancient
ancient india ancient sri lanka and
southeast asia that are to some extent
you know there there's a lot that's
that's worth reading but if you're
asking about the the first step
you know and one of the other projects
melissa and i embarked on was for
melissa to study the history of central
asia places like uzbekistan tajikistan
and so on it's been mentioned several
times
well that's a bit like haiti in that the
point isn't so much you know the unique
history of uzbekistan the point is
partly melissa's estrangement from it
and indeed it thrusts her into a world
of contrasting claims to political
legitimacy that are just totally alien
to her you know obviously like muslim
aristocracy and you know the russian
empire and the chinese empire and
well the iranian empire and so on uh the
mongol empire too resident falls there
you know kublai khan and all that
so you know this this thruster into a
world uh totally unfamiliar
so you know i think um
i think that in challenging yourself to
do that kind of research you discover
something about yourself and you
discover things about what it means to
be an intellectual and that might be the
most positive thing i could say about my
own research about buddhism
maybe i got nothing out of it except you
know a greater appreciation for in the
sense the rudiments of what it is to be
intellectual to ask these questions
nobody else was ever willing to ask
okay so um
white europeans you know
in
asserting that there was this q
manuscript there was this great unknown
manuscript more ancient than anything
extant anything yet discovered anything
that ever had been discovered i think
never would be discovered
in buddhism that there was the original
pure
teaching of the buddha out there to be
established by us
by white european males that's that's
really what we're talking here
especially white men with phds
from places like switzerland and germany
um
much later england got involved in this
really england was pretty late to the
party in this mission you know
um
and there were a few mad frenchmen who
threw their hats in you know
yes partly uh partly it was just an
imitation of what was happening in
christianity i mean christianity is one
of the most influential religions in the
world in case you didn't know partly it
was just an imitation was like oh okay
what's going on in christianity well
there's this huge manuscript hypothesis
there's this fantasy that we can engage
in the comparative reading of different
manuscripts and then arrive at
conclusions that indicate a more ancient
manuscript that doesn't exist today the
real original teaching of jesus christ
that generated all these different
manuscripts
uh so partly it's just an imitation of
what was gone
but above and beyond that
think about power and powerlessness for
the author or for the researcher
if you don't have some kind of messianic
delusion that you are going to be the
white man who discovers this q
manuscript the true original teaching of
the buddha
your work is really very humble
you're walking around asia literally
walking talking to buddhist monks who
know more than you
talking to farmers who know more than
you you're learning their language
starting off at the level of a child and
after many years of research you're
really just able to do what we would
today call anthropology be able to give
a description of their culture their
customs their festivals
you're able to translate some things
into english that have never been
translated before but you know you're
really just uh you can write travel
literature you know here's what it's
like to travel in india here's what it's
like to travel in sri lanka this is not
what white europeans wanted
uh what what europeans wanted is a
fantasy that played out again and again
with the european encounter with ancient
egypt
and just note
pretty much everything you've ever seen
with uh scientology and satanism in our
times
happened like 200 years earlier with
white people deciding that they were the
reincarnation of some ancient pharaoh
from egypt or some ancient wise memory
and literally putting on the hat and
costume you'd be surprised how far that
goes back white europeans and white
americans reviving
um the religion of ancient egypt
obviously just making things up off the
top of their head
um and sometimes conveniently claiming
that through their clairvoyance or
through their memory of their past
incarnation that they could read an
ancient egyptian manuscript or you know
uh inscription on stone that nobody else
can read through this you know and what
do you know
you know it just happens to say the most
convenient thing for their own cult
leadership it says that you should
donate money to them because they're the
second coming of christ or whatever it
says you know uh and by the way um in
the founding of the the mormon church um
their their quote unquote visionary
founder he indulged in a lot of those
same excesses he demonstrates some of
the same things and in at least one case
it was literally an egyptian manuscript
that he worked from and he just made up
off the top of his head what he thought
that this manuscript should say he had
no ability whatsoever to actually
interpret hieroglyphic writing
yeah he had no scholarly background of
that kind so
you know
the
fantasy
of a white european
boldly you know exploring asia
and you know as napoleon did quite
literally you know clearing the sand off
of ancient tombs and ancient structures
and revealing something of tremendous
importance from the past that had been
ignored by locals this fantasy was
reenacted again and again
even when all of the evidence on the
ground grossly contradicted it
so again
napoleon legitimately
strode out into the desert with his army
and they discovered a great many things
that the locals were ignoring not
because the locals were stupid not
because locals were blind but because
the locals were devout muslims they had
no interest in ancient egyptian temples
and tombs they didn't worship that stuff
they didn't study it they regarded that
as part of their impious past they were
not interested in the pre-muslim past
it's not like it was hidden right it was
disregarded it was not regarded as
important by the people in that culture
now the fantasy that europeans were
discovering things that were concealed
ignored forgotten by locals this played
out again notably in cambodia
when the french show up and discover
um angkor wat which is still a tourist
attraction to this day it was inhabited
it wasn't in an uninhabited jungle it
wasn't in a desert or wasteland it
wasn't being ignored it was inhabited by
buddhist monks who were performing
rituals there every day and there were
buddhist pilgrims whatever you want to
say there were lay people who went there
and heard sermons and participated in
ceremonies it was an active
living inhabited temple it wasn't
abandoned it wasn't covered with
moss and trees
interestingly which is now part of its
appeal so i just say it was still being
used as a buddhist temple not as a as a
hindu temple but this fantasy this is
one part of the fantasy but then the
next part of the fantasy the q
hypothesis is is uh crucial to is that
these white european men would then with
bold decisive acts
um
reveal the true meaning of these texts
of this philosophy that the local
indigenous people had been blind to or
ignored now i'm i'm in a better position
than most
to realize the extent to which this
fantasy actually can be true i myself
like i've done research where i'm
discovering things in these texts it's
like how is it possible nobody else has
seen what i've seen here and it's
similar to what i was just saying about
islam it's not that they haven't read
the text not they haven't looked at the
text but it's that they uh they don't
see because they don't want to see you
know you'll keep it yeah yeah
uh you know so to give an example try
talking to anyone in thailand today
about
slavery
you know
are they unaware of what it says in the
ancient buddhist texts about slavery try
talking to anyone about you know any of
these slightly edgy provocative
uncomfortable issues
um
[Music]
whether you're talking to local people
or white europeans there are a lot of
things people get very uncomfortable and
very evasive about very quickly but you
are not like napoleon
discovering uh some ancient egyptian
tomb or you know a relic or monument
that's been uh disregarded or forgotten
by the by the local people uh it's a
very different character but
nevertheless i mean you know they're
they're if you get into this kind of
scholarship
you will have some experiences where you
know you've in effect discovered
something everyone else is ignoring you
found something that's of some cultural
significance or philosophical
significance that other people are
disregarding basically because there's
something else they want to believe
that's motivating them to ignore that
the text says that in that place or even
that it says it 10 or 20 times
uh throw the cannon okay but with that
having uh with that caveat or i don't
know
that i would with that uh having been
said
you know obviously it's a ludicrous and
fundamentally racist power fantasy that
europeans would boldly strive into the
dust-covered monastic libraries of asia
blow the dust off the text and then
start making discoveries and start
asserting that they we
white western europeans we know the true
ancient teaching of the buddha which all
the local indigenous people have ignored
that has remained unknown to them that's
been disregarded uh or forgotten or
corrupted in their own tradition so that
assertion of the q hypothesis is crucial
to this uh this fantasy that many
different white men acted out in many
different ways
there is a famous hypothesis
uh it's called the solar origin
hypothesis solar solar
and this is a it's kind of the perfect
textbook example of this
white man power fantasy playing out
this guy strove out into uh i honestly
forget if he went to india or sri lanka
where exactly he went and he discovered
that he would declare that the real
ultimate original meaning of buddhism
was worshiping the sun
s-u-n not s-o-n and
that the texts had been corrupted and
misrepresented and that in fact if you
look at the original text in just the
right way the buddha isn't described as
an historical figure or a human being
he's actually a personification of the
sun god and that all this other stuff
has been some kind of mistake or
misinterpretation now
what a ridiculous theory
is you know
200 years ago now is it more or less
ridiculous than in the year 2021
www.jesusbuddha.com
this is this is something with the phd
from european university it's the same
thing it's the same fantasy it's the
same
uh mentality there were these drastic
attempts at reappropriation and
reinterpretation of buddhism
uh
using one methodology or another but
very often um these white western people
even if they had a veneer of
respectability when posing for a black
and white photo very often they were
religious eccentrics very often they
were people who dabbled in the use of
hashish heroin well that time would be
opium
so on and so forth that they used
mind-altering drugs that they were
really the long-haired hippies of their
time even if they kept their hair
cropped short they were wildly eccentric
people who often had grandiose delusions
about their own importance that the
delusion that they were themselves the
reincarnation of some spiritual leader
uh so on and so forth
so
you know the idea that
you could disregard all of the available
evidence
in the name of this more ancient texts
that uh there was this q manuscript the
q hypothesis
and that you
you maybe you were specially born for
this task you were reincarnated just to
do this you were going to be the one to
solve
the ancient puzzle you were going to be
the one to discover the ancient egyptian
tomb however you want to put it
um
[Music]
you know that really
inspired
that same what i guess is called the
heroic generation you know in this
perverse way
and it continues to warp our entire
literature of what's written about
buddhism and our attitudes towards
positive in the universities in even the
most ostensibly respectable texts that
we've got
and that delusion was so widespread it
influenced and warped research about
buddhism in japan
cambodia laos thailand sri lanka india
tibet is a huge part of the world are
you talking about religious scholars
some of whom were german and swiss
some of whom were french english uh they
didn't all come from the same place they
weren't all a part of the same
conspiracy but i think all of them
were influenced by napoleon's journey to
egypt all of them were influenced by i
mean even if they didn't read them
the best-selling books that spun out of
napoleon's journey to egypt directly and
indirectly all of them were influenced
by the fact that so you guys may not
know this
but for a couple centuries there you
know fortune telling done by
uh the roma
aka the gypsies of europe you know um it
was said to be
an ancient egyptian
art form the tarot card was said to be
an ancient egyptian magic or science
these things all they have nothing to do
with ancient egypt there's no connection
they don't have anything to do with
modern egypt either there's no
connection there you know they they saw
you know what were the successful
commercialized hippie cults of their of
their day and they to some extent
competed with them and vied with them
they were certainly not people who are
interested in in debunking them uh they
were not in this sense you know
um
scientists working against religion uh
they were themselves men swept up in the
religious mania of their own times and
that's hard for
people who are born and raised in europe
to see
well let me tell you something it's
harder for people born and raised in
cambodia
i talked to so many cambodians face to
face who just told me but what are you
saying
uh everything
from the buddha has been translated into
english by that british couple they
would say that british married couple
they translate everything you should
know all the problems are solved like
like they they literally had the idea oh
well you don't need to read pali because
you can read buddhist philosophy in
english because this one married couple
did all the work so they're talking
about
thomas reese davids and his wife
whoo you know where do you where do you
want me to start it's hard for me to sit
down with a white western person and
communicate to them look i know you've
seen a respectable looking photo of this
guy in an expensive suit posing for a
camera in black and white
okay now i've got to talk you through
step by step so you can really
understand that this guy was really a
dangerous crackpot and a lunatic and his
wife was probably even worse in some
ways his life was better in some ways
his wife was better because once in a
while she kind of cracks a smile and
jokes with the audience about what
[ __ ] all this is that's that's kind
of better she lets you in on the joke
once in a while as a mean old woman she
wrote some stuff where it's like look
this this but this is all nonsense you
know uh this this kind of thing so you
get you get a little bit of a contrast
there but anyway that is um
you know that is fundamentally the
decline
and fall of buddhist scholarship we went
from one period of our history in which
we had a massively collegial cooperative
multilingual multicultural model of of
buddhism that fundamentally had to do
with going to the place living in the
place getting married to a local woman
or raising a kid or living in a buddhist
monastery and even the guys who were
with the military living there long
enough that they really learned the
language and had some some death of
appreciation and understanding
um so that had advantages and that was a
period of incredibly rapid progress in
the field
i just
really sorry if you if you just go and
take those books off the shelf you
really would have to spend some hours or
weeks but just appreciating the mass
of scholarship that was done at that
time it's incredible
okay
and then that came to an end you know
and then it was all over
and instead we switched to a period of
time where people were getting educated
about buddhism and languages i mean look
so melissa just saw this a couple weeks
ago i mean she's heard me criticize the
way chinese is taught in university
classrooms now that you can't you cannot
possibly earn trainings but very briefly
you talk about having 40 students in a
classroom 40 students is small some
universities it's 200 students in a
classroom it's 300 students okay but
let's just say 40 students in a
classroom sitting at desks in a grid the
professor stands at the front of the
classroom and presses play on an audio
cd and you fill out a multiple choice
test during the class you speak for two
minutes you can't learn sanskrit this
way you can't learn chinese this way and
people pay tens of thousands of dollars
and they get the credential and people
can tell you oh yeah they got a ba an ma
and a phd in asian studies or however
they define it and no they don't have
remotely the level of proficiency that
that
you know heroic generation
however
the heroic generation had two
unbelievable sources of bias one one
source of which was just them directly
picking up the [ __ ] of the
indigenous people themselves
most crucially taking on the attitudes
of the brahmanas who taught them
sanskrit in india it's not the only
example i think there were people who
spent time in tibet and took on some of
the [ __ ] ideas of tibetan buddhist
monks but they actually live with these
people and respect those there's
something to that but crucially the
attitude towards sanskrit and then
construing this q hypothesis delusion uh
so on and so forth you know
the other one was that the europeans
brought with them their own kind of
[ __ ]
and if you don't really know what i'm
talking about here this may seem
unrelated but it's really related the
video of mine i would recommend the most
is my video on the spiritual origins of
nazi philosophy
pardon me the nazis as a political
movement
had a great deal to do
[Music]
with exactly these uh european responses
to exotic asian philosophies
including but not limited to buddhism so
i'm going to give you guys the link to
that if you if you some of you will just
really not know what i'm talking about
when i'm talking about the insane
european illusion that's a 35 minute
long video
um the occult origin of nat's ideology
one that i put a lot of time into also
sadly i think when i finished that video
i said i'm never putting that many hours
into a video again um but that brings
together for you that video a sense of
um
you know so so i'm saying there was the
madness they appropriated from their
assistance in asia then there was the
madness they brought with them to asia
which was i think it can be truly called
a uh
a napoleon complex this kind of you know
napoleonic mania
now i'm just gonna have one more thing i
see your i see your uh questions guys
and i will answer these questions
not everyone was so lucky as to be
exoticized in the way that india and
china were
right
this pattern i've described
i i feel the first real example of it is
egypt
you could get into the earliest origins
you can talk about actually the european
conquest of the
cannery islands you get into some
earlier examples you look at william
shakespeare writing about some uh exotic
far-off paradises and you know the
discovery of islands in the you know
caribbean and so on you could talk about
some other example what was what was the
first exoticization in this in this
sense well
the way europeans
looked at
ancient egypt the way they looked at
ancient india the way they looked at
ancient china
they had no such appreciation
for ancient australia
or for ancient canada for the ancient
indigenous people of north america and
south america right so large parts of
the world europeans just encountered
with a genocidal attitude and it could
be asked from various angles how much or
have little appreciation for the culture
and history of africa africa as a whole
we have to divide up african to several
different zones frankly north africa
east west africa
but there was no such fascination with
african mythology religion or history um
so not everyone got this exoticizing
treatment and so as bad as it may have
been you have to keep in mind the way
europeans treated the japanese the way
they treated the people of thailand was
so much better than the way they treated
other
other people around the world so you
know as especially but yeah what we have
coming out of this today um
sorry i think you guys got it but my
fundamental point is as bad as it was
in the old days in the heroic period we
then had this transition to the
scholarship of our times based in the
university which is really just a
process of the blind leading the blind
and pretty much all scholars today are
really just recycling and ripping off
the accomplishments of that earlier uh
heroic generation and have have nothing
positive or negative to offer of their
own
so yeah that's it that's that's the
death
of buddhist scotia
so baby do you have any any thoughts or
questions i mean i say melissa's off
camera i will i will answer your
questions guys but melissa um
you came into my life at an interesting
time because it's all totally over for
me i mean there's no i don't think
there's ever been a time we've been
together
no there has been i was i was just gonna
say there's never been a time we've been
together when i've thought about going
back and getting a phd in buddhism again
but actually
actually it has been talked about a few
times that i could go and rekindle my
expertise and get a phd on this yeah
yeah go on yeah i didn't wonder i mean
for you what put a little bit of this
but what it means for you is very
different than what it means for any of
my other ex-girlfriends either were
other women who were with me and other
times in my life
uh yeah sure
well my ques my question or my comment
is not going to be a scholarly question
i don't think
so if you're okay with me talking yeah
what's in your mind well i just remember
when i was first
uh introducing you to my parents yeah i
was gushing basically over how
how impressed i was with your
scholarship that yeah this period of
time in your life when you were but a
scholar
i just had never met anybody like that
and never talked with anybody like that
that had really gone to a place and
studied ancient scripture you know
actually
[Music]
inscriptions you know stone inscriptions
to me that was just so
just fascinating so yeah i was really
excited you know i was saying like this
is somebody who's like studying so many
languages and her parents had no
interest
in that way
yeah that's right yeah i was i was i was
alluding to that yeah um
so yeah i guess in that sense it was
sad for me to realize so few people
really value that so few people really
care about
ancient yeah scripture or ancient
religions well i was doing i was doing
all the modern stuff at the same time i
was also studying communism and what
happened within the last hundred years
they have gotten into meditation you
know they they don't understand where it
comes from and all these people in the
west who don't understand it and
they don't have a question
that it comes from this you know
hallowed
place this hallowed source so it is just
interesting to me that you you were one
of the few people that you know just
said no i read this
i know from all sides that this is
complete [ __ ] right yeah
yeah
so anyway that's that's me i just heard
that as part of your life well you know
i'd say my own feeling about it one
subtle way in which it's changed is that
you know
i i used to feel like you know that the
sad thing was i'd done all this work and
i gained all this expertise
and then i moved on to do something
completely different with my life right
but now of course i see that as my
greatest accomplishment and the most
wonderful thing about me and precisely
what is so rare and extraordinary is to
have attained that level of knowledge
and proficiency and experience and then
give it up and move on that's that's
more as opposed to spending the rest of
your life [ __ ] around
higher education in this way you're
being more you knew the problems with it
when you were talking with scholars and
you were talking to people with phds and
buddhism
i know at the time you knew this but
like right actually shifting was like
you know my way to make progress in the
world my way to change the world is not
through
doing the same thing that these people
have been doing yeah would you say in
this video that they haven't made
progress
when you have an actual group of people
you know so yeah
yeah
um
yeah so that's you know it's partly a
change in my attitude towards this
change but what what you want to do with
it and so on and so forth yeah um
[Music]
but
i think it's
wonderful that your scholarship on this
will still exist we'll continue to exist
that your voice
in but a scholarship
yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
um
[Music]
you know i i think the big difference is
that with buddhism nobody feels there's
a sense of urgency for new scholarship
and new challenges to orthodoxy uh with
islam everyone feels the sense of
urgency and nobody knows what to do
about it
and you know like hey if we don't do
something to change the muscle world you
know this is a that's a disaster case in
point you know
afghanistan etc etc
something's got to change with islam
there has to be some new direction taken
um
you know and they're wrong i mean there
is tremendous
urgency it really does matter it's it's
of unbelievable importance to like more
than a billion people that we really
make progress in in buddhist scholarship
and i think that you know um the
knock-on effects
of buddhism for people who have no idea
what buddhism is around the world i mean
so you mentioned your own parents doing
meditation and so on and so forth people
like hitomi mochizuki or whatever you
know they say that all around the world
there are these people who who don't
know what it is that they're a victim of
you know the kind of knock-on indirect
significance of buddhism strongest and
you know i feel like when i first came
on youtube
there was this brief period of intense
scrutiny being directed towards
christianity there was the atheist
movement really challenging christianity
and it didn't last
it faded you know it was this brief
um brief intense period of hope that
something would be improved by atheists
really challenging uh christianity now
you know again i do think there's a
difference and if you look around my
works you'll see i mention this
i think buddhism can have some value in
the 22nd century and the 23rd century
i think christianity has none at all i
think islam has none at all you know
but if buddhism is gonna exist in any
form it has to be a form that doesn't it
doesn't teach people to pray to cure
cancer for example i mean i'm sorry but
like let's let's be real let's talk
about something a lot of different
religions have in common the belief in
prayer the belief that donating money
to that religious institution will
um
you will be magically rewarded by the
gods or by fate or what have you i mean
there were a lot of really common scams
built into all these all these religions
you know there are huge fundamental
parts of buddhism that have to be uh
challenged and changed and discarded
and
you know um
i i remember so sorry this is a little
bit of a long story guys
there was a scholar of buddhism
who converted to catholicism
and it was a very unusual thing
newspapers have changed this was
mentioned in our local newspaper in
canada i forget why or what the excuse
was maybe it was just because it was
picked up in the catholic papers and
somebody was catholic but it was you
know
buddhist scholar with a phd converts to
catholicism and this was the story
anyway i was actually in the classroom
with professor leonard priestley when
one of my other students he was an older
guy
he was 35 or something he uh he stood up
and he said during the question where he
said you know uh you might have noticed
the newspapers reported that professor
so and so you know converted to
uh catholicism after so many years of
the scholar one of them and when and
priestly stood there in his uh ineffable
manner
and said
i don't know
if i could say that anybody
has really
converted
to catholicism
i think it might be more fair to say
that he
reverted
like that they got a laugh out of me and
a couple other more uh intellectual
students in the classroom because you
know i got i got the point of that
um
now this particular professor who was in
the newspapers at the time
his bizarre justification
for his conversion
was that he felt that
catholicism was fundamentally correct
because it was based on a human being
worshiping something other than
themselves
and that buddhism was fundamentally
wrong because it was based on
self fascination
that you were yourself the object of the
of the religion you know
now there were a couple other
controversies uh quoted
connected to this and
exactly what it meant how it was
translated into french was somewhat
different and so on believe it or not
there was
people were talking about this for for
some time who who said what who meant
what exactly talking about
self-fascination
anyway uh
you know i think exactly what everyone
picks up on about christianity correctly
is that christianity is very
fundamentally about self-abasement
is that you as the worshiper are nothing
and god is everything
and
you know that you are small and your
time on earth is short and is of very
little significance
whereas what is of significance you know
is this other entity this other thing
this other story and it doesn't really
matter that much whether it's jesus or
moses or you know which version of
christianity we're talking about here
the the
the denigrating
function of faith in christianity is
obvious to everyone
now it doesn't mean everyone opposes it
some people think it's a good thing you
know some people think that instead a
religion like buddhism leads to egomania
or that nihilism and atheism in general
lead to late egomania so my point is
this um
[Music]
i think that people sense the urgency of
challenging christianity and of
challenging islam even when there aren't
terrorist attacks that week or that
month or what have you
because they
feel
not even that they understand or know or
think about or talk about they feel
how denigrating it is you know this
aspect of worshiping the great unknown
other
uh the idea that
you don't live for your own interest or
your own will
but for somebody else's
and
they
lose sight of the profoundly
you know denigrating effect buddhism has
on people's lives
because buddhism is not denigrating in
that way
it's not
now
let me ask you honestly though see i
think there's a real grass greener on
the other side of the hill type of
fallacy here
what [ __ ] up people more
sitting down to pray
and hearing nothing back
or engaging in meditation
where you do hear something back
i've got to tell you meditation [ __ ]
people up far worse far worse than
prayer
um i'll just digress on that for one
moment i think you can basically talk
about two types of prayer
uh silent prayer just in the sense that
you hear nothing back from god you pray
and god says nothing
even if you pray for god to give you a
sign
and then you can talk about ecstatic
prayer
many different traditions do this in
different ways where one way or another
you exhaust yourself to the point where
you have some kind of hallucination so
that can be done through
dancing
uh just swirling around in a circle
uh chanting in a repetitious way while
fasting while whipping yourself while
eating wormwood if you don't know
wormwood it's a hallucinogenic bush that
people ate in medieval europe and
mysteriously it was associated with a
whole bunch of religious occasions in
the of the dark ages so you know you can
talk about kind of silent prayer you got
an ecstatic prayer
um
but you know even with that ecstatic
prayer the fact that you had to fast
and frenetically dance and do all these
things to get yourself into this altered
state of mind to supposedly have some
kind of hallucination or or see god or
hear from god or something that already
separates it from the realm of the
normal in a way that buddhist meditation
does not um i remember talking about
this very honestly and very directly so
i i could name the buddhist monks and
name the temple but i'm i'm not going to
what's the point what's the point
i don't know i don't know why i said to
myself i remember talking with a group
of buddhist monks and some of them were
kind of buddhist scholars and like
laypeople but who were professional
buddhist preachers and
everyone other than me was basically
deriding the scholarly approach to
buddhism and saying that like it was
better to just have an approach to
buddhism based on meditation
and what i said i did speak in a very
charismatic self-confident way compared
to the other people in that circle so
really nobody said [ __ ] back to me most
of the other people were kind of
waffling hippies and they missed me i
said
any young scholar who goes and takes one
book
off the shelf he takes the suta napata
off the shelf that's a good book to
start with if you want to know about
buddhist philosophy
you know
it's a thin book sit in the path okay
he sees
how many other books
are still on that shelf he knows how
little he knows he's aware of his own
ignorance okay i said let me tell you
every day i meet people who never took
that book off the shelf who didn't have
a scholarly approach
they sat down and meditated and they
discovered that they are the next
incarnation of the buddha maitreya that
they have achieved buddha consciousness
that they know something i don't know
and nobody else is known for this
like i meet people every day who have
delusions of grandeur who have messianic
delusions affirmed by their meditative
experiences
and everybody in that [ __ ] circle
knows what i'm talking about
like that's the thing like like i was i
was really young when that happened but
i i could say that from my experience so
you've got these other senior buddhist
monks there
they they've they haven't talked to a
few hippies who convinced themselves
they were the next incarnation of of my
trap or they haven't known other
buddhist monks who were making money by
telling people that by doing guided
messages oh
so you've discovered you've discovered
what i knew about you from when you
first walked in this door that you are
the reincarnation of ananda and that you
know you have this special i could tell
you from your aura
there's a lot of money in that [ __ ]
there's money in sex too money money
fame sex power respect everything a lot
of a lot of good-looking middle-aged
women discover buddhism and
have sexual relations with buddhist
monks or buddhist gurus who aren't monks
men wearing white robes who aren't uh
aren't wearing the saffron colored robe
as people say you know um
yeah uh i'm just telling you honestly
you know
the type of delusion the type of ego
trip the type of impact meditation has
on people's lives it's much much worse
than prayer
it's truly dangerous it's truly
destructive
and from the outside people don't see it
because what we're sensitive to what
we're looking for is the type of
denigration and self-abdication that's
associated with worshiping
a god or a god-like figure whether that
be jesus muhammad or or otherwise so
it's true buddhism is lacking that but
buddhism has its own dangers
with terrible terrible consequences not
just for india and not just for sri
lanka not just for thailand
but for california you know for for the
whole world
so we have a question about canada
jinsan
you have not been watching my youtube
channel long enough
to know that not only did i criticize
canada ginseng
i talked with her on several occasions
two or three occasions and i made a
youtube video
summarizing and responding to the
conversation i had with her
after she had uh converted to islam i
don't know i assume she's still with it
i assume she hasn't hasn't uh
assumed she hasn't lost her faith in
that also she lost her faith in youtube
to convert to islam
okay uh
great question from call me squishy uh
quote how did you start learning chinese
so she's asking how and not why
we have done a video together melissa's
voice is in it so what is it called the
time to learn chinese is now
that's really the video to see
there you go the time to learn chinese
is right now so this is really about the
why of learning chinese i'll give you
that like
but yeah you know i started learning
chinese because i had to give up on all
this other stuff that's the short answer
[Laughter]
yeah i mean i can get into it but you
know it was after uh after everything
else in my life had failed and i knew
what a joke western academia was and all
these different fields i'd already been
involved in before and i thought well
i'll go mainstream i'll study a language
more than one billion speakers and uh
and press ahead that way
also didn't work out
and uh
you know
i i love my life i'm very happy that i
have the life now that i have
and that i didn't end up in one academic
trap rather than another but yeah
basically i had to turn to chinese in
desperation after finding
um
the powerless state of western academia
in a series of other disciplines
including buddhism that we've just been
talking about
so got a question from william again
uh
oh god can i even remember the name of
my own
essay asking more about the british
couple who translated
uh
the sutras into english
uh i believe it's called the opposite of
buddhism
so i have this
article and you have to click through
it's in sections
yes here we go i'm gonna give you here
we go section one
so we'll give you this link
um so you see it's a section one and
then you have to click to read section
two et cetera et cetera this is also one
of my essays that's been translated into
chinese and i have never read the
chinese it was translated did you know
that yeah i have several several essays
of mine i've translated chinese yeah i
was translated before i learned chinese
myself years before i never worked on
chinese so it was it was translated and
published in in chinese
uh several my essays were i have several
if you if you read my resume you'll see
that i've never i've never read it i've
gone back and read it after after
learning chinese it would be very hard
work for me to read but sure that'd be
great i should have a youtube video of
me reading it out loud chinese
my poorly pronounced chinese video the
whole thing regret
uh the audiobook version
anyway that'll that'll really fill you
in with more about that and yeah um as
you can imagine part of the reason why
they were so
uh influential was how few people came
before them and how few people came
after them
so uh ddp says i don't know it's an
unusual name to use ddp welcome to the
crowd quote the attitude towards islam
was totally different because
amongst western scholars
totally different attitude towards
buddhism because of the ottoman empire
i don't quite find that credible
i mean i think the difference is that
from a muslim perspective
they're right everybody else is wrong
they're going to heaven and everybody
else can go to hell
you know
uh
in
you you have a view with islam that is
totally set on
mutual
extermination it's dominate or
exterminate that's really all that's
possible with that religion
now is christianity so much better
depends what century you're talking
about there are several centuries in
spain and italy where christianity is
just about as bad you know christianity
was really awful
um but today
if you live in nantucket you know you
know um where christianity has become
sufficiently corrupt and cease to take
itself seriously it's much much better
and now that doesn't mean i'm
pro-christian i'm i'm a nihilistic
atheist but no i mean you know uh
if you start to get into literature
there were plenty of white europeans you
worshipped um especially the the
spiritual schools of thought within
islam
um
[Music]
you know sufi islam and so on and so
forth what the hell there was that
best-selling book the five pillars of
wisdom and all this crap there were
various attempts so-called perennialism
the perennial philosophy of trying to
reinvent
um
sufi mysticism and islamic philosophy uh
for a western audience and a lot of that
stuff had a big audience it has a big
following when i first got involved in
veganism a lot of the vegan hippies
identified as some kind of sufi mystic
were attached to
a watered down islam one way or the
other
um so you know we just say
um
okay so uh call me squishy says she
never thought about that prayer versus
meditation and the flip side of that is
any excuses people make for meditation
should be held up to
um the same scrutiny that you would
apply to prayer if people tell you that
meditation can for example improve your
sex life do you believe that about
prayer
it is equally true of prayer it is
neither more or less true of prayer
which is to say from one perspective
it's totally false
about prayer but from another
it's kind of a little like you know if
you just kind of sit there and think
about it you know that's what you're
doing with prayer kind of thing i think
it makes some
some uh tiny difference so and i would
refer ddp's final comment to this ddp
says quote vipassana is not dangerous
close quote that's a goddamn lie and i
mean either you're speaking out of
ignorance
or
you're intentionally lying because
you're shilling for one of the many
groups that makes money out of selling
fibasta and look hold it to the same
standards you would apply to prayer if
you're not skeptical about vipassana
just replace the word meditation
with prayer and ask yourself if you
would now be skeptical or not about
exactly the same claims there is a woman
who is a vegan activist i believe she
still is but i haven't heard from her in
years now she blocked me and frankly
defamed me on the internet too but she
was friends with me for a short time
i remember you might think she'd
continue to be friends with me because
when i first met her she was making
excuses for and supporting vipassana and
she'd been through the academic
literature evaluating the outcomes of
the meditation and she would say things
like well you know when you compare it
to going to the gym or doing yoga you
know has some minor effects on you know
self-esteem or optimism has some some
kind of very minor benefits for people
and makes them feel better you take you
take people who are depressed and do
this and you compare it to a placebo
group and compare it to a group that
went to the gym and did yoga and
weightlifting or something and i
remember i talked it through with her in
a kind of rigorous way
and by the end of the conversation if it
was it was just like one or two
conversations she really agree with me
she realized that she'd been she'd been
lying to herself that these claims they
you're engaging in a kind of moving the
goalpost fallacy um which is equivalent
to christians there were real studies
doing this i could google around for
them there were christians who convinced
themselves that prayer would make plants
grow faster it's like you had one group
of people who would pray in front of a
plant every day and then the other group
of plants didn't get prayers and they
claimed that these plants grew
taller than those
so so this is the mighty god of israel
you believe in like you know even if
this were true you have this incredibly
trivial five percent higher plant growth
thanks to prayer or something you know
this is this is what you're what you're
getting into so ddp i've got to tell you
man
um
it's a hell of a thing for you to say if
you pass and that is not dangerous you
don't know anyone where it ruined their
life you don't know anyone where it
really seriously negatively impacted
their life you know i'd say this too to
people who make that kind of claim about
antidepressant drugs
like if you have
50 friends 50 acquaintances who used
antidepressant drugs you don't know any
of them for whom it had really serious
negative impacts in their lives
i just say with buddhism and buddhist
meditation follow-up can be hard to do
because when people quit the church they
may just completely disappear you may
not hear about it if you're close
friends with the buddhist monk and
someone but you know if you are if
you're still in touch no no no
these these religious movements and
these religious rituals they have
profound negative impacts on people's
lives and that is part of the reason why
the the rate of attrition is so high for
buddhism including defacing buddhism
people are drawn in by promises
basically of a miracle cure
and then when they don't get those
results or they actually have negative
results they have a negative impact on
their life a very very large percentage
of them quit and the people who stay in
the cult they don't do follow-up and
evaluation like oh well where are the
other eighty percent of the people who
signed up at the same time
you know this guy yeah
oh that you can quit oh yes
well yeah in reality though within islam
people do too you know people uh you
know i just say people just stop praying
and stop going to temple and stop taking
it seriously it's true though if they
actually formally leave the religion
that's a death penalty offense islam
that is a big deal sure
and yes significant numbers of buddhists
convert to islam every year tragically
look at look at that phenomenon
uh too
well william mcgeheen asks quote do you
think islam will be sanitized and
revised at some point well william
you lived through the last opportunity
for that to happen and it's over so my
answer is no if you look back at the
last 500 years there were two big
opportunities to revise the religion i
would say one was communism you know
during the high point of communism there
could have been a kind of new revised
modernized version of islam that was
created by the communist religion by the
way if you don't know the nazis
literally created their own form of
christianity they called it positive
christianity
stranger things have happened there
could have been a kind of official uh
revised and sanitized version at that
time and then the second was obviously
the the shock
um and the
war ensuing after september 11 2001. and
neither neither one of those things
happened so it didn't happen then it's
not going to happen now it's not going
to happen the next 100 years for the
next 100 years we're going to be looking
at more plainly than ever before one
road that embraces modernity secularism
science science atheism nihilism
pragmatism realism and then another road
that instead walks back toward the
darkness of the dark ages and in saying
this about islam i can say the same
thing about judaism i could say the same
thing about christianity i can say the
uh
the same thing about hinduism so on and
so forth so i think more starkly and
clearly than ever we're looking at uh
two roads that part this way and we've
got to start asking ourselves and asking
others you know which side are you on
and if you are on my side guys i mean
i'm now in my mid-40s okay
what's going to change
and what are you going to do to make it
happen you know you've seen how little
the world has changed in the last 20
years after september 11th 2001
coming up on it's okay it's it's 19
years i admit it they only come you know
whatever
[Laughter]
um
you know
in that span of roughly 20 years you see
how little religion has changed how
little the world has changed despite the
united states government pouring out
over 100 billion dollars a year in this
budget for these so-called forever wars
forever wars that one day eventually had
to come to an end okay
what's going to change in the next 10
years what's going to change in the next
20 years i'm not going to live forever
with global warming going the way it is
this planet may not last forever and
frankly global warming puts it in a
great comparative perspective what do
you want to do about global warming guys
oh yeah well you know
[Laughter]
you know how about having a two-child
policy for everyone maximum of two
children
okay how are you going to enforce that
in afghanistan how are you going to
force that in saudi arabia
any kind of child planning policy you
want for planet earth
what you're up against everywhere is
religion now yes in some places you're
up against catholicism in some places
you're up against hinduism but obviously
for a huge part of the world you're up
against islam okay so do you want to
deal with
global warming through globally having a
reduced
birth rate
religion is your first and foremost
obstacle and if we don't do something
it's going to be your last option okay
well what about radically reducing the
amount of meat meat and dairy
eggs people consume having a dietary
shift toward veganism or
semi-veganism
guess who you're up against oh what a
surprise
it's catholicism hinduism islam it's
religion so i mean we have these two
paths pardon
and um we've got to start asking each
other which side are you on and if
you're on the same path i'm on if you're
a nihilist if you can appreciate that
the future is nihilism and not faith
then you've got to start asking tough
questions about you know if you want a
better world what are you willing to do
to get it
and if nobody's willing to start doing
anything
then soon enough we're going to have no
world at all